ACPS plans to censor student newspaper Theogony
April 30, 20252428
ACPS plans to censor student newspaper Theogony
Alexandria City High Schools' student publications may face censorship from the administration. (Photo/Arwen Clemans)
Facebooktwittermail
By Caitlyn Meisner | cmeisner@alextimes.com

Theogony, the Alexandria City High School student newspaper, along with other ACHS student publications, is facing censorship of its coverage by Alexandria City Public Schools administrators and the School Board, according to student journalists at Theogony.

The School Board plans to amend its policy on student publications to enforce stricter rules on coverage of controversial issues, such as transportation, the High School Project and transgender policies, these journalists said.

“It really all started when we started writing investigative articles about controversial ACPS actions, which then caused the district [public relations] team to step in and try to take away our independence,” James Libresco, an ACHS senior and Theogony co-editor-in-chief, said in an interview with the Times.

Theogony has existed since the 1950s and has been independently run for at least 16 years, Libresco said. In addition to covering controversial decisions at ACPS, Theogony journalists cover topics relating to high school students: phone use in schools, class schedules, book bans, sports, music and entertainment.

But, students say the ACPS communications department, led by Chief of School and Community Relations Julia Burgos, has attempted to crack down on coverage that highlights problems within city schools.

The Times attempted to interview Superintendent Melanie Kay-Wyatt, Ed.D., Burgos and School Board Chair Michelle Rief, Ph.D. for this story, but the request was denied through the follow- ing statement:

“The current policy governing student publications is School Board Policy JP – Student Publications, which remains in effect at this time. As part of a regularly scheduled review, the policy is currently undergoing a revision process. While I would welcome the opportunity to sit down for an interview with you, we are still in the draft stages of the policy revision and I would not be able to discuss any potential changes or outcomes at this time. …” the statement, attributed to Rief, said.

Where it all started
The censorship effort on behalf of the administration isn’t an entirely new issue.

In October 2020, Theogony was the first to report that the superintendent at the time, Gregory Hutchings Jr., Ed.D., sent one of his two children to Bishop Ireton High School rather than ACPS. Libresco said Hutchings’ administration attempted to stop the article from being published.

Libresco, in one of his articles about transgender policies, said the administration asked for the headline to be changed in his article, “ACPS Not to Comply with Youngkin Anti-Transgender Policy.”

“Our staff advisor got a phone call by someone from the central office leadership team basically intimidating her to change her article headline, which she did, and then we had a big class discussion about it, in which our staff voted to change the headline back to its original form,” Libresco recalled of the 2022 incident.

Also during this time, the School Board established the Governance Committee, its first standing committee, in 2022. This would serve as the place for Board members to discuss policy changes, such as the student publication policy.

As of Dec. 19, 2024, the Board and Kay-Wyatt have collectively revised 338, or 77%, of ACPS’ policies, according to Board Member Ashley Simpson Baird, Ph.D.

Libresco said the district PR team also attempted to have him remove a statement from another article stating that the superintendent declined to comment.

“When we wrote [the article], they tried to intimidate us into deleting it, using manipulative language,” he recalled. “I was 15 or 16 going up against grown professionals.”

In April 2024, Libresco published the first article in a series on the High School Project. The series highlighted an administrative restructuring requiring 16 mid-level administrators to reapply for their jobs and the subsequent fallout.

A June 2024 article – written by Libresco, News Editor Julia Gwin and Entertainment Editor Nadja Duss – continued to highlight discontent within ACHS when a leaked bell schedule was released. An installment of the series, published in the Alexandria Times in August 2024, highlighted how students, particularly those in the International Academy, thought the vacancies caused by the restructuring would impact the coming school year.

Another article in the series was authored by Rozalia Finkelstein, the opinion and comics editor and incoming editor-in-chief, in August 2024. Finkelstein highlighted the errors in student schedules and difficulties arising from having to shuffle between campuses during the school day.

It was around this time that Theogony’s staff advisor, Kamilah Lawson, was notified that the School Board policy governing student publications would be updated. The student journalists said they worked together that summer to craft a policy of their own known as Voices Unbound.

In the fall, Theogony journalists tried to discuss the changes with Board members – especially those on the Governance Committee, Libresco said – and garner support from them.

“They seemed like they were really reasonable and open to working with us, which was great, and they told us to go and come back and find a plan that would work for us,” Libresco said. “… We presented our plan in the fall, … then slowly and slowly, it turned out that they weren’t actually going to start to listen to what we had to say.

“I respect a lot of these leaders a lot, and when they try to make it seem like they’re listening to our feedback, but at the same time are disregarding everything, it’s disappointing,” Libresco continued.

Libresco said he learned from someone with knowledge of the situation that Kay-Wyatt took the Board into a closed session to speak about the policy change.

“[That’s when] everything started to change,” he said. “[Kay-Wyatt said] we had inaccuracies in our reporting and that [a policy change] needed to be done. … School Board members who were originally pretty supportive, [were] now pushing back pretty strongly at everything we had to say.”

Then, Gwin wrote an explosive story on the transportation issues ACHS was facing during the school day in October 2024. Students were showing up to classes more than 10 minutes late because they were waiting for administrators to open building doors or waiting on buses. A Theogony analysis found several hundred students opted to walk between campuses instead.

“I fully believe that the transportation problems at our school would not have been solved without [Gwin’s] article, because that launched a public discussion about the issue. It caused City Council to step in. It caused other news outlets to start reporting on it,” Libresco said.


James Libresco (left) and Casey Donahue (right), the co-editor-in-chiefs of Theogony, have been outspoken about the administration’s censorship of their work. (Photo/Arwen Clemans)
The ACPS policies
The current ACPS policy for student publications was adopted in December 1996 and amended in July 2005 and again in December 2014.

It outlines the basic role of the student journalist to not write material that’s obscene, defamatory or invades the privacy of others. It also outlines the roles of the staff advisor and principal, who technically serves as the editor of the paper. This is the policy the Board and administration is using to halt current work by Theogony journalists.

In total, the current policy is only one page long.

In a draft proposed new policy by ACPS obtained by the Times, the length of it more than doubles and outlines seven journalistic guiding principles, the journalism process for students to follow, access to sources and information, republication and the role of the student editors.

The guiding principles are similar to the aforementioned role of the journalist in the current policy. It tells students to be responsible, fair, honest, accurate, independent and accountable for their reporting while minimizing harm.

One of the changes in the proposed policy is in the “verifying” step of the journalism process. It states:

“For material that may be controversial, the staff co-editor submits the article to the Campus Administrator who is responsible for ensuring the content will not cause substantial disruption of school activities. If the Campus Administrator and staff co-editor cannot reach an agreement about the publication of an article or other material, the content is escalated to the executive principal whose decision is final,” it reads.

Finkelstein said this provision is likely to weaken Theogony’s product.

“The current proposed policy, it not only revokes our ranks, but I think really actively would make our paper worse,” Finkelstein said. “We’ve done controversial work, but we haven’t done wrong work. We haven’t said anything libelous, and we haven’t said anything that is wrong. They aren’t saying that what we’re saying is inaccurate or libelous. They’re saying that they don’t like it.”

Libresco also said this part of the policy hasn’t been observed in the past when it came to controversial issues not dealing with ACPS.

“A School Board member told me, for example, ‘If you guys write about transgender students, we would want to have an extra set of eyes on that.’ OK, well then literally, a couple of weeks later, we did write about transgender students, and that was not reviewed. It wasn’t asked to be reviewed or edited or anything,” Libresco pointed out.

He said this happened again when Theogony wrote an article about seeing a Department of Homeland Security vehicle parked outside of ACHS’ King Street campus. Nobody from the administration asked to review or edit the piece. “They don’t really care about high-interest things. They only care about things that show the truth of what they’re doing when they want to keep it hidden,” Libresco said.

Another major difference in the expanded policy is that student journalists cannot perform research for an ACPS publication and then “use the results of that research to write, collaborate on, or in any other way contribute to the material published in an (sic) non-ACPS publication” because they may lose their “journalistic privileges.”

This is in line with another addition to the policy which may prohibit Theogony articles from being reprinted in outside publications, such as the Times. This is because the School Board, according to its policy, is deemed the publisher of Theogony and other student publications.

Casey Donahue, an ACHS senior and co-editor-in-chief, said in both of these policies, there are no protections for student journalists.

“This current School Board policy actually doesn’t have any protections of student journalists or the advisor for content decisions, which for us, is kind of appalling, because why wouldn’t our school district want to protect us?”

According to the 1988 Supreme Court decision in Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, the First Amendment did not require schools to “affirmatively promote particular types of student speech” and schools could refuse to sponsor speech, according to Oyez.org.

In a Wednesday afternoon statement to the Times, City Councilor and former School Board member Abdel Elnoubi said he was “deeply concerned” about the proposed changes.

“Journalism is meant to hold power accountable, and when those in power decide what can be reported, that is textbook authoritarianism. I grew up under an authoritarian regime that used vague, subjective terms like ‘controversial’ and ‘disruption’ to silence dissent,” Elnoubi wrote. “I urge the School Board to reflect on the message this policy sends to students and the broader community, especially at a time when democracy and free speech are under threat nationally.”

In response to the Times’ inquiry about the draft policy we obtained, Rief issued another statement:

“The draft policy is still being reviewed by the Board’s Governance Committee, which [I do] not serve on. Any drafts circulating are not final. We will keep you informed when the policy is scheduled to come before the full Board,” Rief wrote.

Voices Unbound
Theogony, The Labyrinth and ACHS Yearbook students collaborated with the Student Press Law Center, a nonprofit that works to defend the First Amendment rights of student journalists, to craft their Voices Unbound policy that expanded protections and freedom for students.

Theogony has also worked with the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression, the Journalism Education Association and the National Scholastic Press Association.

Libresco said the main goal of the students is to have the expanded proposed policy above be voted down and Voices Unbound to become ACPS’ officially adopted policy.

According to the 10-page Voices Unbound document shared with the Times, much of the requirements for student journalists reflect what ACPS already has in place: to remain fair, accurate and professional.

Voices Unbound states there should be no prior review of articles by the administration unless the content is libelous, constitutes an “unwarranted invasion of privacy,” is obscene or violates federal or state laws.

Libresco also said one of the main pillars of Voices Unbound is for ACPS to restore students’ First Amendment rights.

“All we’re asking for is the freedom to report on the truth without being burdened and being biased by the figures that we are reporting on. We’re just asking to report on the truth,” he said. “We’re just asking to be able to show what’s happening, and we’re just asking for a class to be able to continue to thrive.”

Other aspects of the student-crafted policy include the authority to appeal editorial decisions and that ACPS communications staff would not be able to interfere in student publication operations in any way – including sitting in on interviews with school staff.

Gwin said with the Voices Unbound policy, Theogony journalists can continue to reflect the state of the school.

“I love our school, but there’s also that small percentage that needs to be fixed and that can be worked on, and if we lose the opportunity to hold those people [accountable] and display those issues, that isn’t a good thing for our school and the future of it,” Gwin said.

Voices Unbound has been endorsed by all three of ACPS’ student representatives to the Board, the ACHS Student Government Association, the ACHS Writing Center and various other organizations.

According to a School Board member that confirmed this with Libresco, the Board is expected to discuss the policies at its May 8 meeting with an expected vote on May 29. ACPS’ communications team declined to confirm these dates with the Times.